06-basics.md, before:

# Basics #

Just printing 'Hello World' is not enough, is it? You want to do more
than that - you want to take some input, manipulate it and get
something out of it. We can achieve this in Python using constants and
variables, and we'll learn some other concepts as well in this
chapter.

## Comments ##

*Comments* are any text to the right of the `#` symbol and is mainly
 useful as notes for the reader of the program.

For example:

~~~python
print('Hello World') # Note that print is a function
~~~

or:

~~~python
# Note that print is a function
print('Hello World')
~~~

Use as many useful comments as you can in your program to:

- explain assumptions
- explain important decisions
- explain important details
- explain problems you're trying to solve
- explain problems you're trying to overcome in your program, etc.

[*Code tells you how, comments should tell you why.*](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/2006/12/code-tells-you-how-comments-tell-you-why.html)

This is useful for readers of your program so that they can easily
understand what the program is doing. Remember, that person can be
yourself after six months!

## Literal Constants ##

An example of a literal constant is a number like `5`, `1.23`, or a
string like `'This is a string'`or `"It's a string!"`. It is called a
literal because it is *literal* - you use its value literally. The
number `2` always represents itself and nothing else - it is a
*constant* because its value cannot be changed. Hence, all these are
referred to as literal constants.

## Numbers ##

Numbers are mainly of two types - integers and floats.

An examples of an integer is `2` which is just a whole number.

Examples of floating point numbers (or *floats* for short) are `3.23`
and `52.3E-4`. The `E` notation indicates powers of 10. In this case,
`52.3E-4` means `52.3 * 10^-4^`.

*Note for Experienced Programmers:* There is no separate `long`
type. The `int` type can be an integer of any size.

## Strings ##

A string is a *sequence* of *characters*. Strings are basically just a
bunch of words.

You will be using strings in almost every Python program that you
write, so pay attention to the following part.

### Single Quote ###

You can specify strings using single quotes such as `'Quote me on
this'`. All white space i.e. spaces and tabs are preserved as-is.

### Double Quotes ###

Strings in double quotes work exactly the same way as strings in
single quotes. An example is `"What's your name?"`

### Triple Quotes ###

You can specify multi-line strings using triple quotes - (`"""` or
`'''`). You can use single quotes and double quotes freely within the
triple quotes. An example is:

~~~python
'''This is a multi-line string. This is the first line.
This is the second line.
"What's your name?," I asked.
He said "Bond, James Bond."
'''
~~~

### Strings Are Immutable ###

This means that once you have created a string, you cannot change
it. Although this might seem like a bad thing, it really isn't. We
will see why this is not a limitation in the various programs that we
see later on.

*Note for C/C++ Programmers:* There is no separate `char` data type in
Python. There is no real need for it and I am sure you won't miss it.

*Note for Perl/PHP Programmers:* Remember that single-quoted strings
and double-quoted strings are the same - they do not differ in any
way.

### The format method ###

Sometimes we may want to construct strings from other
information. This is where the `format()` method is useful.

Save the following lines as a file `str_format.py`:

~~~python
age = 20
name = 'Swaroop'

print('{0} was {1} years old when he wrote this book'.format(name, age))
print('Why is {0} playing with that python?'.format(name))
~~~

Output:

~~~
$ python3 str_format.py
Swaroop was 20 years old when he wrote this book
Why is Swaroop playing with that python?
~~~

How It Works:

A string can use certain specifications and subsequently, the *format*
method can be called to substitute those specifications with
corresponding arguments to the `format` method.

Observe the first usage where we use `{0}` and this corresponds to the
variable `name` which is the first argument to the format
method. Similarly, the second specification is `{1}` corresponding to
`age` which is the second argument to the format method. Note that
Python starts counting from 0 which means that first position is at
index 0, second position is at index 1, and so on.

Notice that we could have achieved the same using string
concatenation: `name + ' is ' + str(age) + ' years old'` but that is
much uglier and error-prone. Second, the conversion to string would be
done automatically by the `format` method instead of the explicit
conversion to strings needed in this case. Third, when using the
`format` method, we can change the message without having to deal with
the variables used and vice-versa.

Also note that the numbers are optional, so you could have also
written as:

~~~python
age = 20
name = 'Swaroop'

print('{} was {} years old when he wrote this book'.format(name, age))
print('Why is {} playing with that python?'.format(name))
~~~

which will give the same exact output as the previous program.

What Python does in the `format` method is that it substitutes each
argument value into the place of the specification. There can be more
detailed specifications such as:

~~~python
 decimal (.) precision of 3 for float '0.333'
>>> '{0:.3}'.format(1/3)
 fill with underscores (_) with the text centered
 (^) to 11 width '___hello___'
>>> '{0:_^11}'.format('hello')
 keyword-based 'Swaroop wrote A Byte of Python'
>>> '{name} wrote {book}'.format(name='Swaroop', book='A Byte of Python')
~~~

### Escape Sequences ###

Suppose, you want to have a string which contains a single quote
(`'`), how will you specify this string? For example, the string is
`What's your name?`. You cannot specify `'What's your name?'` because
Python will be confused as to where the string starts and ends. So,
you will have to specify that this single quote does not indicate the
end of the string. This can be done with the help of what is called an
*escape sequence*. You specify the single quote as `\'` - notice the
backslash. Now, you can specify the string as `'What\'s your name?'`.

Another way of specifying this specific string would be `"What's your
name?"` i.e. using double quotes. Similarly, you have to use an escape
sequence for using a double quote itself in a double quoted
string. Also, you have to indicate the backslash itself using the
escape sequence `\\`.

What if you wanted to specify a two-line string? One way is to use a
triple-quoted string as shown [previously](#triple-quotes) or you can
use an escape sequence for the newline character - `\n` to indicate
the start of a new line. An example is `This is the first line\nThis
is the second line`. Another useful escape sequence to know is the
tab - `\t`. There are many more escape sequences but I have mentioned
only the most useful ones here.

One thing to note is that in a string, a single backslash at the end
of the line indicates that the string is continued in the next line,
but no newline is added. For example:

~~~python
"This is the first sentence. \
This is the second sentence."
~~~

is equivalent to 

~~~python
"This is the first sentence. This is the second sentence."
~~~

### Raw String ###

If you need to specify some strings where no special processing such
as escape sequences are handled, then what you need is to specify a
*raw* string by prefixing `r` or `R` to the string. An example is
`r"Newlines are indicated by \n"`.

Note for Regular Expression Users

:   Always use raw strings when dealing with regular
    expressions. Otherwise, a lot of backwhacking may be required. For
    example, backreferences can be referred to as `'\\1'` or `r'\1'`.

## Variable ##

Using just literal constants can soon become boring - we need some way
of storing any information and manipulate them as well. This is where
*variables* come into the picture. Variables are exactly what the name
implies - their value can vary, i.e., you can store anything using a
variable. Variables are just parts of your computer's memory where you
store some information. Unlike literal constants, you need some method
of accessing these variables and hence you give them names.

## Identifier Naming ##

Variables are examples of identifiers. *Identifiers* are names given
to identify *something*. There are some rules you have to follow for
naming identifiers:

- The first character of the identifier must be a letter of the
  alphabet (uppercase ASCII or lowercase ASCII or Unicode character)
  or an underscore ('_').
- The rest of the identifier name can consist of letters (uppercase
  ASCII or lowercase ASCII or Unicode character), underscores ('_') or
  digits (0-9).
- Identifier names are case-sensitive. For example, `myname` and
  `myName` are **not** the same. Note the lowercase `n` in the former
  and the uppercase `N` in the latter.
- Examples of *valid* identifier names are `i`, `__my_name`,
  `name_23`. Examples of ''invalid'' identifier names are `2things`,
  `this is spaced out`, `my-name`, `>a1b2_c3` and
  `"this_is_in_quotes"`.

## Data Types ##

Variables can hold values of different types called **data
types**. The basic types are numbers and strings, which we have
already discussed. In later chapters, we will see how to create our
own types using [classes](#object-oriented-programming).

## Object ##

Remember, Python refers to anything used in a program as an *object*.
This is meant in the generic sense. Instead of saying 'the
*something*', we say 'the *object*'.

*Note for Object Oriented Programming users:* Python is strongly
object-oriented in the sense that everything is an object including
numbers, strings and functions.

We will now see how to use variables along with literal
constants. Save the following example and run the program.

## How to write Python programs ##

Henceforth, the standard procedure to save and run a Python program is
as follows:

1. Open your editor of choice, such as Sublime Text.
2. Type the program code given in the example.
3. Save it as a file with the filename mentioned.
4. Run the interpreter with the command `python3 program.py` (or
   `python program.py` on Windows) to run the program.

## Example: Using Variables And Literal Constants ##

~~~python
 Filename : var.py
i = 5
print(i)
i = i + 1
print(i)

s = '''This is a multi-line string.
This is the second line.'''
print(s)
~~~

Output:

~~~
$ python3 var.py
5
6
This is a multi-line string.
This is the second line.
~~~

How It Works:

Here's how this program works. First, we assign the literal constant
value `5` to the variable `i` using the assignment operator
(`=`). This line is called a statement because it states that
something should be done and in this case, we connect the variable
name `i` to the value `5`.  Next, we print the value of `i` using the
`print` function which, unsurprisingly, just prints the value of the
variable to the screen.

Then we add `1` to the value stored in `i` and store it back. We then
print it and expectedly, we get the value `6`.

Similarly, we assign the literal string to the variable `s` and then
print it.

*Note for static language programmers:* Variables are used by just
assigning them a value. No declaration or data type definition is
needed/used.

### Logical And Physical Line ###

A physical line is what you *see* when you write the program. A
logical line is what *Python sees* as a single statement. Python
implicitly assumes that each *physical line* corresponds to a *logical
line*.

An example of a logical line is a statement like `print('Hello
World')` - if this was on a line by itself (as you see it in an
editor), then this also corresponds to a physical line.

Implicitly, Python encourages the use of a single statement per line
which makes code more readable.

If you want to specify more than one logical line on a single physical
line, then you have to explicitly specify this using a semicolon (`;`)
which indicates the end of a logical line/statement. For example,

~~~python
i = 5
print(i)
~~~

is effectively same as

~~~python
i = 5;
print(i);
~~~

and the same can be written as

~~~python
i = 5; print(i);
~~~

or even

~~~python
i = 5; print(i)
~~~

However, I **strongly recommend** that you stick to **writing a
maximum of a single logical line on each single physical line**. The
idea is that you should never use the semicolon. In fact, I have
*never* used or even seen a semicolon in a Python program.

There is one kind of situation where this concept is really useful :
if you have a long line of code, you can break it into multiple
physical lines by using the backslash. This is referred to as
**explicit line joining**:

~~~python
s = 'This is a string. \
This continues the string.'
print(s)
~~~

This gives the output:

~~~
This is a string. This continues the string.
~~~

Similarly,

~~~python
print\
(i)
~~~

is the same as

~~~python
print(i)
~~~

Sometimes, there is an implicit assumption where you don't need to use
a backslash. This is the case where the logical line has a starting
parentheses, starting square brackets or a starting curly braces but
not an ending one. This is called **implicit line joining**. You can
see this in action when we write programs using [lists](#list) in
later chapters.

### Indentation ###

Whitespace is important in Python. Actually, **whitespace at the
beginning of the line is important**. This is called
**indentation**. Leading whitespace (spaces and tabs) at the beginning
of the logical line is used to determine the indentation level of the
logical line, which in turn is used to determine the grouping of
statements.

This means that statements which go together **must** have the same
indentation. Each such set of statements is called a **block**. We
will see examples of how blocks are important in later chapters.

One thing you should remember is that wrong indentation can give rise
to errors. For example:

~~~python
i = 5
 print('Value is ', i) # Error! Notice a single space at the start of the line
print('I repeat, the value is ', i)
~~~

When you run this, you get the following error:

~~~
  File "whitespace.py", line 4
    print('Value is ', i) # Error! Notice a single space at the start of the line
    ^
IndentationError: unexpected indent
~~~

Notice that there is a single space at the beginning of the second
line. The error indicated by Python tells us that the syntax of the
program is invalid i.e. the program was not properly written. What
this means to you is that *you cannot arbitrarily start new blocks of
statements* (except for the default main block which you have been
using all along, of course). Cases where you can use new blocks will
be detailed in later chapters such as the
[Control Flow](#control-flow).

*How to indent:* Use only spaces for indentation, with a tab stop of 4
spaces. Good editors like Komodo Edit will automatically do this for
you. Make sure you use a consistent number of spaces for indentation,
otherwise your program will show errors.

*Note to static language programmers:* Python will always use
indentation for blocks and will never use braces. Run `from __future__
import braces` to learn more.

## Summary ##

Now that we have gone through many nitty-gritty details, we can move
on to more interesting stuff such as control flow statements. Be sure
to become comfortable with what you have read in this chapter.

Commit message:

Adding mention of `end` parameter for `print`
Based on:

From: sourin.sutradhar@gmail.com

Hi Swaroop,

I am a C/C++ programmer. Recently I have started learning python from
your book. Your way of writing is really awesome and clean. As for
suggestion, I think it would be nice if you add a small section on
formatted output.

For example:

In your PDF version of Byte of python, at the end of page 44 in
section8.3, you have described a program to print numbers using for
loop. But as per the output all the numbers are getting printed in new
lines. This is confusing , especially for C/C++/Java programmers. As for
such situations you can add a note describing that to avoid the newline,
one can also write is as follows (though there are many other methods):

for i in range(1,5):
   print(i, end=' ')
#to avoid newline

Or you can add a whole section in the book to descrive formatted output
in python. That will be helpful for beginners.

Thank you Swaroop. Really enjoying your book on Python.

Best of luck.

06-basics.md, after:

# Basics #

Just printing 'Hello World' is not enough, is it? You want to do more
than that - you want to take some input, manipulate it and get
something out of it. We can achieve this in Python using constants and
variables, and we'll learn some other concepts as well in this
chapter.

## Comments ##

*Comments* are any text to the right of the `#` symbol and is mainly
 useful as notes for the reader of the program.

For example:

~~~python
print('Hello World') # Note that print is a function
~~~

or:

~~~python
# Note that print is a function
print('Hello World')
~~~

Use as many useful comments as you can in your program to:

- explain assumptions
- explain important decisions
- explain important details
- explain problems you're trying to solve
- explain problems you're trying to overcome in your program, etc.

[*Code tells you how, comments should tell you why.*](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/2006/12/code-tells-you-how-comments-tell-you-why.html)

This is useful for readers of your program so that they can easily
understand what the program is doing. Remember, that person can be
yourself after six months!

## Literal Constants ##

An example of a literal constant is a number like `5`, `1.23`, or a
string like `'This is a string'`or `"It's a string!"`. It is called a
literal because it is *literal* - you use its value literally. The
number `2` always represents itself and nothing else - it is a
*constant* because its value cannot be changed. Hence, all these are
referred to as literal constants.

## Numbers ##

Numbers are mainly of two types - integers and floats.

An examples of an integer is `2` which is just a whole number.

Examples of floating point numbers (or *floats* for short) are `3.23`
and `52.3E-4`. The `E` notation indicates powers of 10. In this case,
`52.3E-4` means `52.3 * 10^-4^`.

*Note for Experienced Programmers:* There is no separate `long`
type. The `int` type can be an integer of any size.

## Strings ##

A string is a *sequence* of *characters*. Strings are basically just a
bunch of words.

You will be using strings in almost every Python program that you
write, so pay attention to the following part.

### Single Quote ###

You can specify strings using single quotes such as `'Quote me on
this'`. All white space i.e. spaces and tabs are preserved as-is.

### Double Quotes ###

Strings in double quotes work exactly the same way as strings in
single quotes. An example is `"What's your name?"`

### Triple Quotes ###

You can specify multi-line strings using triple quotes - (`"""` or
`'''`). You can use single quotes and double quotes freely within the
triple quotes. An example is:

~~~python
'''This is a multi-line string. This is the first line.
This is the second line.
"What's your name?," I asked.
He said "Bond, James Bond."
'''
~~~

### Strings Are Immutable ###

This means that once you have created a string, you cannot change
it. Although this might seem like a bad thing, it really isn't. We
will see why this is not a limitation in the various programs that we
see later on.

*Note for C/C++ Programmers:* There is no separate `char` data type in
Python. There is no real need for it and I am sure you won't miss it.

*Note for Perl/PHP Programmers:* Remember that single-quoted strings
and double-quoted strings are the same - they do not differ in any
way.

### The format method ###

Sometimes we may want to construct strings from other
information. This is where the `format()` method is useful.

Save the following lines as a file `str_format.py`:

~~~python
age = 20
name = 'Swaroop'

print('{0} was {1} years old when he wrote this book'.format(name, age))
print('Why is {0} playing with that python?'.format(name))
~~~

Output:

~~~
$ python3 str_format.py
Swaroop was 20 years old when he wrote this book
Why is Swaroop playing with that python?
~~~

How It Works:

A string can use certain specifications and subsequently, the *format*
method can be called to substitute those specifications with
corresponding arguments to the `format` method.

Observe the first usage where we use `{0}` and this corresponds to the
variable `name` which is the first argument to the format
method. Similarly, the second specification is `{1}` corresponding to
`age` which is the second argument to the format method. Note that
Python starts counting from 0 which means that first position is at
index 0, second position is at index 1, and so on.

Notice that we could have achieved the same using string
concatenation: `name + ' is ' + str(age) + ' years old'` but that is
much uglier and error-prone. Second, the conversion to string would be
done automatically by the `format` method instead of the explicit
conversion to strings needed in this case. Third, when using the
`format` method, we can change the message without having to deal with
the variables used and vice-versa.

Also note that the numbers are optional, so you could have also
written as:

~~~python
age = 20
name = 'Swaroop'

print('{} was {} years old when he wrote this book'.format(name, age))
print('Why is {} playing with that python?'.format(name))
~~~

which will give the same exact output as the previous program.

What Python does in the `format` method is that it substitutes each
argument value into the place of the specification. There can be more
detailed specifications such as:

~~~python
 decimal (.) precision of 3 for float '0.333'
>>> '{0:.3}'.format(1/3)
 fill with underscores (_) with the text centered
 (^) to 11 width '___hello___'
>>> '{0:_^11}'.format('hello')
 keyword-based 'Swaroop wrote A Byte of Python'
>>> '{name} wrote {book}'.format(name='Swaroop', book='A Byte of Python')
~~~

Since we are discussing formatting, note that `print()` always ends
with an invisible "new line" character (`\n`) so that repeated calls
to `print()` will all print on a separate line each. To prevent this
newline character from being printed, you can override the `end`
parameter to `print`:

~~~python
print("a", end="")
print("b", end="")
~~~

Output:

~~~
ab
~~~

### Escape Sequences ###

Suppose, you want to have a string which contains a single quote
(`'`), how will you specify this string? For example, the string is
`What's your name?`. You cannot specify `'What's your name?'` because
Python will be confused as to where the string starts and ends. So,
you will have to specify that this single quote does not indicate the
end of the string. This can be done with the help of what is called an
*escape sequence*. You specify the single quote as `\'` - notice the
backslash. Now, you can specify the string as `'What\'s your name?'`.

Another way of specifying this specific string would be `"What's your
name?"` i.e. using double quotes. Similarly, you have to use an escape
sequence for using a double quote itself in a double quoted
string. Also, you have to indicate the backslash itself using the
escape sequence `\\`.

What if you wanted to specify a two-line string? One way is to use a
triple-quoted string as shown [previously](#triple-quotes) or you can
use an escape sequence for the newline character - `\n` to indicate
the start of a new line. An example is `This is the first line\nThis
is the second line`. Another useful escape sequence to know is the
tab - `\t`. There are many more escape sequences but I have mentioned
only the most useful ones here.

One thing to note is that in a string, a single backslash at the end
of the line indicates that the string is continued in the next line,
but no newline is added. For example:

~~~python
"This is the first sentence. \
This is the second sentence."
~~~

is equivalent to 

~~~python
"This is the first sentence. This is the second sentence."
~~~

### Raw String ###

If you need to specify some strings where no special processing such
as escape sequences are handled, then what you need is to specify a
*raw* string by prefixing `r` or `R` to the string. An example is
`r"Newlines are indicated by \n"`.

Note for Regular Expression Users

:   Always use raw strings when dealing with regular
    expressions. Otherwise, a lot of backwhacking may be required. For
    example, backreferences can be referred to as `'\\1'` or `r'\1'`.

## Variable ##

Using just literal constants can soon become boring - we need some way
of storing any information and manipulate them as well. This is where
*variables* come into the picture. Variables are exactly what the name
implies - their value can vary, i.e., you can store anything using a
variable. Variables are just parts of your computer's memory where you
store some information. Unlike literal constants, you need some method
of accessing these variables and hence you give them names.

## Identifier Naming ##

Variables are examples of identifiers. *Identifiers* are names given
to identify *something*. There are some rules you have to follow for
naming identifiers:

- The first character of the identifier must be a letter of the
  alphabet (uppercase ASCII or lowercase ASCII or Unicode character)
  or an underscore ('_').
- The rest of the identifier name can consist of letters (uppercase
  ASCII or lowercase ASCII or Unicode character), underscores ('_') or
  digits (0-9).
- Identifier names are case-sensitive. For example, `myname` and
  `myName` are **not** the same. Note the lowercase `n` in the former
  and the uppercase `N` in the latter.
- Examples of *valid* identifier names are `i`, `__my_name`,
  `name_23`. Examples of ''invalid'' identifier names are `2things`,
  `this is spaced out`, `my-name`, `>a1b2_c3` and
  `"this_is_in_quotes"`.

## Data Types ##

Variables can hold values of different types called **data
types**. The basic types are numbers and strings, which we have
already discussed. In later chapters, we will see how to create our
own types using [classes](#object-oriented-programming).

## Object ##

Remember, Python refers to anything used in a program as an *object*.
This is meant in the generic sense. Instead of saying 'the
*something*', we say 'the *object*'.

*Note for Object Oriented Programming users:* Python is strongly
object-oriented in the sense that everything is an object including
numbers, strings and functions.

We will now see how to use variables along with literal
constants. Save the following example and run the program.

## How to write Python programs ##

Henceforth, the standard procedure to save and run a Python program is
as follows:

1. Open your editor of choice, such as Sublime Text.
2. Type the program code given in the example.
3. Save it as a file with the filename mentioned.
4. Run the interpreter with the command `python3 program.py` (or
   `python program.py` on Windows) to run the program.

## Example: Using Variables And Literal Constants ##

~~~python
 Filename : var.py
i = 5
print(i)
i = i + 1
print(i)

s = '''This is a multi-line string.
This is the second line.'''
print(s)
~~~

Output:

~~~
$ python3 var.py
5
6
This is a multi-line string.
This is the second line.
~~~

How It Works:

Here's how this program works. First, we assign the literal constant
value `5` to the variable `i` using the assignment operator
(`=`). This line is called a statement because it states that
something should be done and in this case, we connect the variable
name `i` to the value `5`.  Next, we print the value of `i` using the
`print` function which, unsurprisingly, just prints the value of the
variable to the screen.

Then we add `1` to the value stored in `i` and store it back. We then
print it and expectedly, we get the value `6`.

Similarly, we assign the literal string to the variable `s` and then
print it.

*Note for static language programmers:* Variables are used by just
assigning them a value. No declaration or data type definition is
needed/used.

### Logical And Physical Line ###

A physical line is what you *see* when you write the program. A
logical line is what *Python sees* as a single statement. Python
implicitly assumes that each *physical line* corresponds to a *logical
line*.

An example of a logical line is a statement like `print('Hello
World')` - if this was on a line by itself (as you see it in an
editor), then this also corresponds to a physical line.

Implicitly, Python encourages the use of a single statement per line
which makes code more readable.

If you want to specify more than one logical line on a single physical
line, then you have to explicitly specify this using a semicolon (`;`)
which indicates the end of a logical line/statement. For example,

~~~python
i = 5
print(i)
~~~

is effectively same as

~~~python
i = 5;
print(i);
~~~

and the same can be written as

~~~python
i = 5; print(i);
~~~

or even

~~~python
i = 5; print(i)
~~~

However, I **strongly recommend** that you stick to **writing a
maximum of a single logical line on each single physical line**. The
idea is that you should never use the semicolon. In fact, I have
*never* used or even seen a semicolon in a Python program.

There is one kind of situation where this concept is really useful :
if you have a long line of code, you can break it into multiple
physical lines by using the backslash. This is referred to as
**explicit line joining**:

~~~python
s = 'This is a string. \
This continues the string.'
print(s)
~~~

This gives the output:

~~~
This is a string. This continues the string.
~~~

Similarly,

~~~python
print\
(i)
~~~

is the same as

~~~python
print(i)
~~~

Sometimes, there is an implicit assumption where you don't need to use
a backslash. This is the case where the logical line has a starting
parentheses, starting square brackets or a starting curly braces but
not an ending one. This is called **implicit line joining**. You can
see this in action when we write programs using [lists](#list) in
later chapters.

### Indentation ###

Whitespace is important in Python. Actually, **whitespace at the
beginning of the line is important**. This is called
**indentation**. Leading whitespace (spaces and tabs) at the beginning
of the logical line is used to determine the indentation level of the
logical line, which in turn is used to determine the grouping of
statements.

This means that statements which go together **must** have the same
indentation. Each such set of statements is called a **block**. We
will see examples of how blocks are important in later chapters.

One thing you should remember is that wrong indentation can give rise
to errors. For example:

~~~python
i = 5
 print('Value is ', i) # Error! Notice a single space at the start of the line
print('I repeat, the value is ', i)
~~~

When you run this, you get the following error:

~~~
  File "whitespace.py", line 4
    print('Value is ', i) # Error! Notice a single space at the start of the line
    ^
IndentationError: unexpected indent
~~~

Notice that there is a single space at the beginning of the second
line. The error indicated by Python tells us that the syntax of the
program is invalid i.e. the program was not properly written. What
this means to you is that *you cannot arbitrarily start new blocks of
statements* (except for the default main block which you have been
using all along, of course). Cases where you can use new blocks will
be detailed in later chapters such as the
[Control Flow](#control-flow).

*How to indent:* Use only spaces for indentation, with a tab stop of 4
spaces. Good editors like Komodo Edit will automatically do this for
you. Make sure you use a consistent number of spaces for indentation,
otherwise your program will show errors.

*Note to static language programmers:* Python will always use
indentation for blocks and will never use braces. Run `from __future__
import braces` to learn more.

## Summary ##

Now that we have gone through many nitty-gritty details, we can move
on to more interesting stuff such as control flow statements. Be sure
to become comfortable with what you have read in this chapter.
