17-more.md, before:

# More #

So far we have covered a majority of the various aspects of Python
that you will use. In this chapter, we will cover some more aspects
that will make our knowledge of Python more well-rounded.

## Passing tuples around ##

Ever wished you could return two different values from a function? You
can. All you have to do is use a tuple.

~~~
>>> def get_error_details():
...     return (2, 'second error details')
...
>>> errnum, errstr = get_error_details()
>>> errnum
2
>>> errstr
'second error details'
~~~

Notice that the usage of `a, b = <some expression>` interprets the
result of the expression as a tuple with two values.

If you want to interpret the results as `(a, <everything else>)`, then
you just need to star it just like you would in function parameters:

~~~
>>> a, *b = [1, 2, 3, 4]
>>> a
1
>>> b
[2, 3, 4]
~~~

This also means the fastest way to swap two variables in Python is:

~~~
>>> a = 5; b = 8
>>> a, b = b, a
>>> a, b
(8, 5)
~~~

## Special Methods ##

There are certain methods such as the `__init__` and `__del__` methods
which have special significance in classes.

Special methods are used to mimic certain behaviors of built-in
types. For example, if you want to use the `x[key]` indexing operation
for your class (just like you use it for lists and tuples), then all
you have to do is implement the `__getitem__()` method and your job is
done. If you think about it, this is what Python does for the `list`
class itself!

Some useful special methods are listed in the following table. If you
want to know about all the special methods,
[see the manual](http://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#special-method-names).

`__init__(self, ...)`

:   This method is called just before the newly created object is
    returned for usage.

`__del__(self)`

:   Called just before the object is destroyed

`__str__(self)`

:   Called when we use the `print` function or when `str()`is used.

`__lt__(self, other)`

:   Called when the *less than* operator (&lt;) is used. Similarly,
    there are special methods for all the operators (+, &gt;, etc.)

`__getitem__(self, key)`

:   Called when `x[key]` indexing operation is used.

`__len__(self)`

:   Called when the built-in `len()` function is used for the sequence
    object.

## Single Statement Blocks ##

We have seen that each block of statements is set apart from the rest
by its own indentation level. Well, there is one caveat. If your block
of statements contains only one single statement, then you can specify
it on the same line of, say, a conditional statement or looping
statement. The following example should make this clear:

~~~
>>> flag = True
>>> if flag: print('Yes')
Yes
~~~

Notice that the single statement is used in-place and not as a
separate block.  Although, you can use this for making your program
*smaller*, I strongly recommend avoiding this short-cut method, except
for error checking, mainly because it will be much easier to add an
extra statement if you are using proper indentation.

## Lambda Forms ##

A `lambda` statement is used to create new function
objects. Essentially, the `lambda` takes a parameter followed by a
single expression only which becomes the body of the function and the
value of this expression is returned by the new function.

Example (save as `lambda.py`):

~~~python
points = [ { 'x' : 2, 'y' : 3 }, { 'x' : 4, 'y' : 1 } ]
points.sort(key=lambda i : i['y'])
print(points)
~~~

Output:

~~~
[{'x': 4, 'y': 1}, {'x': 2, 'y': 3}]
~~~

How It Works:

Notice that the `sort` method of a `list` can take a `key` parameter
which determines how the list is sorted (usually we know only about
ascending or descending order). In our case, we want to do a custom
sort, and for that we need to write a function but instead of writing
a separate `def` block for a function that will get used in only this
one place, we use a lambda expression to create a new function.

## List Comprehension ##

List comprehensions are used to derive a new list from an existing
list. Suppose you have a list of numbers and you want to get a
corresponding list with all the numbers multiplied by 2 only when the
number itself is greater than 2. List comprehensions are ideal for
such situations.

Example (save as `list_comprehension.py`):

~~~python
listone = [2, 3, 4]
listtwo = [2*i for i in listone if i > 2]
print(listtwo)
~~~

Output:

~~~
$ python3 list_comprehension.py
[6, 8]
~~~

How It Works:

Here, we derive a new list by specifying the manipulation to be done
(`2*i`) when some condition is satisfied (`if i > 2`). Note that the
original list remains unmodified.

The advantage of using list comprehensions is that it reduces the
amount of boilerplate code required when we use loops to process each
element of a list and store it in a new list.

## Receiving Tuples and Dictionaries in Functions ##

There is a special way of receiving parameters to a function as a
tuple or a dictionary using the * or ** prefix respectively. This is
useful when taking variable number of arguments in the function.

~~~
>>> def powersum(power, *args):
...     '''Return the sum of each argument raised to        specified power.'''
...     total = 0
...     for i in args:
...         total += pow(i, power)
...     return total
...
>>> powersum(2, 3, 4)
25

>>> powersum(2, 10)
100
~~~

Because we have a `*` prefix on the `args` variable, all extra
arguments passed to the function are stored in `args` as a tuple.  If
a ** prefix had been used instead, the extra parameters would be
considered to be key/value pairs of a dictionary.

## The assert statement ##

The `assert` statement is used to assert that something is true. For
example, if you are very sure that you will have at least one element
in a list you are using and want to check this, and raise an error if
it is not true, then `assert` statement is ideal in this
situation. When the assert statement fails, an `AssertionError` is
raised.

~~~
>>> mylist = ['item']
>>> assert len(mylist) >= 1
>>> mylist.pop()
'item'
>>> mylist
[]
>>> assert len(mylist) >= 1
Traceback (most recent call last):
File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
AssertionError
~~~

The `assert` statement should be used judiciously. Most of the time,
it is better to catch exceptions, either handle the problem or display
an error message to the user and then quit.

## Summary ##

We have covered some more features of Python in this chapter and yet
we haven't covered all the features of Python. However, at this stage,
we have covered most of what you are ever going to use in
practice. This is sufficient for you to get started with whatever
programs you are going to create.

Next, we will discuss how to explore Python further.

Commit message:

Adding links on porting to Python 3

17-more.md, after:

# More #

So far we have covered a majority of the various aspects of Python
that you will use. In this chapter, we will cover some more aspects
that will make our knowledge of Python more well-rounded.

## Passing tuples around ##

Ever wished you could return two different values from a function? You
can. All you have to do is use a tuple.

~~~
>>> def get_error_details():
...     return (2, 'second error details')
...
>>> errnum, errstr = get_error_details()
>>> errnum
2
>>> errstr
'second error details'
~~~

Notice that the usage of `a, b = <some expression>` interprets the
result of the expression as a tuple with two values.

If you want to interpret the results as `(a, <everything else>)`, then
you just need to star it just like you would in function parameters:

~~~
>>> a, *b = [1, 2, 3, 4]
>>> a
1
>>> b
[2, 3, 4]
~~~

This also means the fastest way to swap two variables in Python is:

~~~
>>> a = 5; b = 8
>>> a, b = b, a
>>> a, b
(8, 5)
~~~

## Special Methods ##

There are certain methods such as the `__init__` and `__del__` methods
which have special significance in classes.

Special methods are used to mimic certain behaviors of built-in
types. For example, if you want to use the `x[key]` indexing operation
for your class (just like you use it for lists and tuples), then all
you have to do is implement the `__getitem__()` method and your job is
done. If you think about it, this is what Python does for the `list`
class itself!

Some useful special methods are listed in the following table. If you
want to know about all the special methods,
[see the manual](http://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#special-method-names).

`__init__(self, ...)`

:   This method is called just before the newly created object is
    returned for usage.

`__del__(self)`

:   Called just before the object is destroyed

`__str__(self)`

:   Called when we use the `print` function or when `str()`is used.

`__lt__(self, other)`

:   Called when the *less than* operator (&lt;) is used. Similarly,
    there are special methods for all the operators (+, &gt;, etc.)

`__getitem__(self, key)`

:   Called when `x[key]` indexing operation is used.

`__len__(self)`

:   Called when the built-in `len()` function is used for the sequence
    object.

## Single Statement Blocks ##

We have seen that each block of statements is set apart from the rest
by its own indentation level. Well, there is one caveat. If your block
of statements contains only one single statement, then you can specify
it on the same line of, say, a conditional statement or looping
statement. The following example should make this clear:

~~~
>>> flag = True
>>> if flag: print('Yes')
Yes
~~~

Notice that the single statement is used in-place and not as a
separate block.  Although, you can use this for making your program
*smaller*, I strongly recommend avoiding this short-cut method, except
for error checking, mainly because it will be much easier to add an
extra statement if you are using proper indentation.

## Lambda Forms ##

A `lambda` statement is used to create new function
objects. Essentially, the `lambda` takes a parameter followed by a
single expression only which becomes the body of the function and the
value of this expression is returned by the new function.

Example (save as `lambda.py`):

~~~python
points = [ { 'x' : 2, 'y' : 3 }, { 'x' : 4, 'y' : 1 } ]
points.sort(key=lambda i : i['y'])
print(points)
~~~

Output:

~~~
[{'x': 4, 'y': 1}, {'x': 2, 'y': 3}]
~~~

How It Works:

Notice that the `sort` method of a `list` can take a `key` parameter
which determines how the list is sorted (usually we know only about
ascending or descending order). In our case, we want to do a custom
sort, and for that we need to write a function but instead of writing
a separate `def` block for a function that will get used in only this
one place, we use a lambda expression to create a new function.

## List Comprehension ##

List comprehensions are used to derive a new list from an existing
list. Suppose you have a list of numbers and you want to get a
corresponding list with all the numbers multiplied by 2 only when the
number itself is greater than 2. List comprehensions are ideal for
such situations.

Example (save as `list_comprehension.py`):

~~~python
listone = [2, 3, 4]
listtwo = [2*i for i in listone if i > 2]
print(listtwo)
~~~

Output:

~~~
$ python3 list_comprehension.py
[6, 8]
~~~

How It Works:

Here, we derive a new list by specifying the manipulation to be done
(`2*i`) when some condition is satisfied (`if i > 2`). Note that the
original list remains unmodified.

The advantage of using list comprehensions is that it reduces the
amount of boilerplate code required when we use loops to process each
element of a list and store it in a new list.

## Receiving Tuples and Dictionaries in Functions ##

There is a special way of receiving parameters to a function as a
tuple or a dictionary using the * or ** prefix respectively. This is
useful when taking variable number of arguments in the function.

~~~
>>> def powersum(power, *args):
...     '''Return the sum of each argument raised to        specified power.'''
...     total = 0
...     for i in args:
...         total += pow(i, power)
...     return total
...
>>> powersum(2, 3, 4)
25

>>> powersum(2, 10)
100
~~~

Because we have a `*` prefix on the `args` variable, all extra
arguments passed to the function are stored in `args` as a tuple.  If
a ** prefix had been used instead, the extra parameters would be
considered to be key/value pairs of a dictionary.

## The assert statement ##

The `assert` statement is used to assert that something is true. For
example, if you are very sure that you will have at least one element
in a list you are using and want to check this, and raise an error if
it is not true, then `assert` statement is ideal in this
situation. When the assert statement fails, an `AssertionError` is
raised.

~~~
>>> mylist = ['item']
>>> assert len(mylist) >= 1
>>> mylist.pop()
'item'
>>> mylist
[]
>>> assert len(mylist) >= 1
Traceback (most recent call last):
File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
AssertionError
~~~

The `assert` statement should be used judiciously. Most of the time,
it is better to catch exceptions, either handle the problem or display
an error message to the user and then quit.

## Differences between Python 2 and Python 3 ##

Read these articles:

- [Armin's Porting to Python 3 Redux](http://lucumr.pocoo.org/2013/5/21/porting-to-python-3-redux/)
- [PyDanny's Python 3 experience](http://pydanny.com/experiences-with-django-python3.html)
- [Official Django Guide to Porting to Python 3](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/topics/python3/)

## Summary ##

We have covered some more features of Python in this chapter and yet
we haven't covered all the features of Python. However, at this stage,
we have covered most of what you are ever going to use in
practice. This is sufficient for you to get started with whatever
programs you are going to create.

Next, we will discuss how to explore Python further.
