18-what-next.md, before:

# What Next #

If you have read this book thoroughly till now and practiced writing a
lot of programs, then you must have become comfortable and familiar
with Python. You have probably created some Python programs to try out
stuff and to exercise your Python skills as well. If you have not done
it already, you should. The question now is 'What Next?'.

I would suggest that you tackle this problem:

> Create your own command-line *address-book* program using which you
> can browse, add, modify, delete or search for your contacts such as
> friends, family and colleagues and their information such as email
> address and/or phone number. Details must be stored for later
> retrieval.

This is fairly easy if you think about it in terms of all the various
stuff that we have come across till now. If you still want directions
on how to proceed, then here's a hint.

Hint (Don't read without trying first)

:   Create a class to represent the person's information. Use a
    dictionary to store person objects with their name as the key. Use
    the pickle module to store the objects persistently on your hard
    disk. Use the dictionary built-in methods to add, delete and
    modify the persons.

Once you are able to do this, you can claim to be a Python
programmer. Now, immediately
[send me an email](http://swaroopch.com/contact/) thanking me for this
great book ;-). This step is optional but recommended. Also, please
consider [buying a printed copy](http://swaroopch.com/buybook/) to
support the continued development of this book.

If you found that program easy, here's another one:

> Implement the
> [replace command](http://unixhelp.ed.ac.uk/CGI/man-cgi?replace). This
> command will replace one string with another in the list of files
> provided.

The replace command can be as simple or as sophisticated as you wish,
from simple string substitution to looking for patterns (regular
expressions).

After that, below are some ways to continue your journey with Python:

## Example Code ##

The best way to learn a programming language is to write a lot of code
and read a lot of code:

- [Python Cookbook](http://code.activestate.com/recipes/langs/python/)
  is an extremely valuable collection of recipes or tips on how to
  solve certain kinds of problems using Python. This is a must-read
  for every Python user.
- [Python Module of the Week](http://pymotw.com/2/contents.html) is
  another excellent must-read guide to the
  [Python Standard Library](#standard-library).

## Advice ##

- [The Hitchhiker's Guide to Python!](http://docs.python-guide.org/en/latest/)

## Videos ##

- [PyVideo](http://www.pyvideo.org/category)

## Questions and Answers ##

- [Official Python Dos and Don'ts](http://docs.python.org/3/howto/doanddont.html)
- [Official Python FAQ](http://www.python.org/doc/faq/general/)
- [Norvig's list of Infrequently Asked Questions](http://norvig.com/python-iaq.html)
- [Python Interview Q & A](http://dev.fyicenter.com/Interview-Questions/Python/index.html)
- [StackOverflow questions tagged with python](http://beta.stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/python)

## Tutorials ##

- [Awaretek's comprehensive list of Python tutorials](http://www.awaretek.com/tutorials.html)

## Discussion ##

If you are stuck with a Python problem, and don't know whom to ask,
then the
[python-tutor list](http://mail.python.org/mailman/listinfo/tutor) is
the best place to ask your question.

Make sure you do your homework and have tried solving the problem
yourself first.

## News ##

If you want to learn what is the latest in the world of Python, then
follow the [Official Python Planet](http://planet.python.org).

## Installing libraries ##

There are a huge number of open source libraries at the
[Python Package Index](http://pypi.python.org/pypi) which you can use
in your own programs.

To install and use these libraries, you can use
[pip](http://www.pip-installer.org/en/latest/).

## Creating a Website ##

Learn [Flask](http://flask.pocoo.org) to create your own website. Some
resources to get started:

- [Flask Official Quickstart](http://flask.pocoo.org/docs/quickstart/)
- [The Flask Mega-Tutorial](http://blog.miguelgrinberg.com/post/the-flask-mega-tutorial-part-i-hello-world)
- [Example Flask Projects](https://github.com/mitsuhiko/flask/tree/master/examples)

## Graphical Software ##

Suppose you want to create your own graphical programs using
Python. This can be done using a GUI (Graphical User Interface)
library with their Python bindings. Bindings are what allow you to
write programs in Python and use the libraries which are themselves
written in C or C++ or other languages.

There are lots of choices for GUI using Python:

Kivy

:   <http://kivy.org>

PyGTK

:   This is the Python binding for the GTK+ toolkit which is the
    foundation upon which GNOME is built. GTK+ has many quirks in
    usage but once you become comfortable, you can create GUI apps
    fast. The Glade graphical interface designer is indispensable. The
    documentation is yet to improve. GTK+ works well on Linux but its
    port to Windows is incomplete. You can create both free as well as
    proprietary software using GTK+. To get started, read the
    [PyGTK tutorial](http://www.pygtk.org/tutorial.html).

PyQt

:   This is the Python binding for the Qt toolkit which is the
    foundation upon which the KDE is built. Qt is extremely easy to
    use and very powerful especially due to the Qt Designer and the
    amazing Qt documentation. PyQt is free if you want to create open
    source (GPL'ed) software and you need to buy it if you want to
    create proprietary closed source software. Starting with Qt 4.5
    you can use it to create non-GPL software as well. To get started,
    read about [PySide](http://qt-project.org/wiki/PySide).

wxPython

:   This is the Python bindings for the wxWidgets toolkit. wxPython
    has a learning curve associated with it. However, it is very
    portable and runs on Linux, Windows, Mac and even embedded
    platforms. There are many IDEs available for wxPython which
    include GUI designers as well such as
    [SPE (Stani's Python Editor)](http://spe.pycs.net/) and the
    [wxGlade](http://wxglade.sourceforge.net/) GUI builder. You can
    create free as well as proprietary software using wxPython. To get
    started, read the
    [wxPython tutorial](http://zetcode.com/wxpython/).

### Summary of GUI Tools ###

For more choices, see the
[GuiProgramming wiki page at the official python website](http://www.python.org/cgi-bin/moinmoin/GuiProgramming).

Unfortunately, there is no one standard GUI tool for Python. I suggest
that you choose one of the above tools depending on your
situation. The first factor is whether you are willing to pay to use
any of the GUI tools. The second factor is whether you want the
program to run only on Windows or on Mac and Linux or all of them. The
third factor, if Linux is a chosen platform, is whether you are a KDE
or GNOME user on Linux.

For a more detailed and comprehensive analysis, see Page 26 of the
[The Python Papers, Volume 3, Issue 1](http://archive.pythonpapers.org/ThePythonPapersVolume3Issue1.pdf).

## Various Implementations ##

There are usually two parts a programming language - the language and
the software. A language is *how* you write something. The software is
*what* actually runs our programs.

We have been using the *CPython* software to run our programs. It is
referred to as CPython because it is written in the C language and is
the *Classical Python interpreter*.

There are also other software that can run your Python programs:

[Jython](http://www.jython.org)

:   A Python implementation that runs on the Java platform. This means
    you can use Java libraries and classes from within Python language
    and vice-versa.

[IronPython](http://www.codeplex.com/Wiki/View.aspx?ProjectName=IronPython)

:   A Python implementation that runs on the .NET platform. This means
    you can use .NET libraries and classes from within Python language
    and vice-versa.

[PyPy](http://codespeak.net/pypy/dist/pypy/doc/home.html)

:   A Python implementation written in Python! This is a research
    project to make it fast and easy to improve the interpreter since
    the interpreter itself is written in a dynamic language (as
    opposed to static languages such as C, Java or C# in the above
    three implementations)

There are also others such as
[CLPython](http://common-lisp.net/project/clpython/) - a Python
implementation written in Common Lisp and
[IronMonkey](http://wiki.mozilla.org/Tamarin:IronMonkey) which is a
port of IronPython to work on top of a JavaScript interpreter which
could mean that you can use Python (instead of JavaScript) to write
your web-browser ("Ajax") programs.

Each of these implementations have their specialized areas where they
are useful.

## Functional Programming (for advanced readers) ##

When you start writing larger programs, you should definitely learn
more about a functional approach to programming as opposed to the
class-based approach to programming that we learned in the
[object-oriented programming chapter](#object-oriented-programming):

- [Functional Programming Howto by A.M. Kuchling](http://docs.python.org/3/howto/functional.html)
- [Functional programming chapter in 'Dive Into Python' book](http://www.diveintopython.net/functional_programming/index.html)
- [Functional Programming with Python presentation](http://ua.pycon.org/static/talks/kachayev/index.html)

## Summary ##

We have now come to the end of this book but, as they say, this is the
*the beginning of the end*!. You are now an avid Python user and you
are no doubt ready to solve many problems using Python. You can start
automating your computer to do all kinds of previously unimaginable
things or write your own games and much much more. So, get started!

Commit message:

Mentioning Martyr2's Mega Project List

18-what-next.md, after:

# What Next #

If you have read this book thoroughly till now and practiced writing a
lot of programs, then you must have become comfortable and familiar
with Python. You have probably created some Python programs to try out
stuff and to exercise your Python skills as well. If you have not done
it already, you should. The question now is 'What Next?'.

I would suggest that you tackle this problem:

> Create your own command-line *address-book* program using which you
> can browse, add, modify, delete or search for your contacts such as
> friends, family and colleagues and their information such as email
> address and/or phone number. Details must be stored for later
> retrieval.

This is fairly easy if you think about it in terms of all the various
stuff that we have come across till now. If you still want directions
on how to proceed, then here's a hint.

Hint (Don't read without trying first)

:   Create a class to represent the person's information. Use a
    dictionary to store person objects with their name as the key. Use
    the pickle module to store the objects persistently on your hard
    disk. Use the dictionary built-in methods to add, delete and
    modify the persons.

Once you are able to do this, you can claim to be a Python
programmer. Now, immediately
[send me an email](http://swaroopch.com/contact/) thanking me for this
great book ;-). This step is optional but recommended. Also, please
consider [buying a printed copy](http://swaroopch.com/buybook/) to
support the continued development of this book.

If you found that program easy, here's another one:

> Implement the
> [replace command](http://unixhelp.ed.ac.uk/CGI/man-cgi?replace). This
> command will replace one string with another in the list of files
> provided.

The replace command can be as simple or as sophisticated as you wish,
from simple string substitution to looking for patterns (regular
expressions).

If you found that also easy to create, then look at these list of
projects and try writing your own programs:
<https://github.com/thekarangoel/Projects#numbers> (the list is also
at
[Martyr2's Mega Project List](http://www.dreamincode.net/forums/topic/78802-martyr2s-mega-project-ideas-list/))

After that, below are some ways to continue your journey with Python:

## Example Code ##

The best way to learn a programming language is to write a lot of code
and read a lot of code:

- [Python Cookbook](http://code.activestate.com/recipes/langs/python/)
  is an extremely valuable collection of recipes or tips on how to
  solve certain kinds of problems using Python. This is a must-read
  for every Python user.
- [Python Module of the Week](http://pymotw.com/2/contents.html) is
  another excellent must-read guide to the
  [Python Standard Library](#standard-library).

## Advice ##

- [The Hitchhiker's Guide to Python!](http://docs.python-guide.org/en/latest/)

## Videos ##

- [PyVideo](http://www.pyvideo.org/category)

## Questions and Answers ##

- [Official Python Dos and Don'ts](http://docs.python.org/3/howto/doanddont.html)
- [Official Python FAQ](http://www.python.org/doc/faq/general/)
- [Norvig's list of Infrequently Asked Questions](http://norvig.com/python-iaq.html)
- [Python Interview Q & A](http://dev.fyicenter.com/Interview-Questions/Python/index.html)
- [StackOverflow questions tagged with python](http://beta.stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/python)

## Tutorials ##

- [Awaretek's comprehensive list of Python tutorials](http://www.awaretek.com/tutorials.html)

## Discussion ##

If you are stuck with a Python problem, and don't know whom to ask,
then the
[python-tutor list](http://mail.python.org/mailman/listinfo/tutor) is
the best place to ask your question.

Make sure you do your homework and have tried solving the problem
yourself first.

## News ##

If you want to learn what is the latest in the world of Python, then
follow the [Official Python Planet](http://planet.python.org).

## Installing libraries ##

There are a huge number of open source libraries at the
[Python Package Index](http://pypi.python.org/pypi) which you can use
in your own programs.

To install and use these libraries, you can use
[pip](http://www.pip-installer.org/en/latest/).

## Creating a Website ##

Learn [Flask](http://flask.pocoo.org) to create your own website. Some
resources to get started:

- [Flask Official Quickstart](http://flask.pocoo.org/docs/quickstart/)
- [The Flask Mega-Tutorial](http://blog.miguelgrinberg.com/post/the-flask-mega-tutorial-part-i-hello-world)
- [Example Flask Projects](https://github.com/mitsuhiko/flask/tree/master/examples)

## Graphical Software ##

Suppose you want to create your own graphical programs using
Python. This can be done using a GUI (Graphical User Interface)
library with their Python bindings. Bindings are what allow you to
write programs in Python and use the libraries which are themselves
written in C or C++ or other languages.

There are lots of choices for GUI using Python:

Kivy

:   <http://kivy.org>

PyGTK

:   This is the Python binding for the GTK+ toolkit which is the
    foundation upon which GNOME is built. GTK+ has many quirks in
    usage but once you become comfortable, you can create GUI apps
    fast. The Glade graphical interface designer is indispensable. The
    documentation is yet to improve. GTK+ works well on Linux but its
    port to Windows is incomplete. You can create both free as well as
    proprietary software using GTK+. To get started, read the
    [PyGTK tutorial](http://www.pygtk.org/tutorial.html).

PyQt

:   This is the Python binding for the Qt toolkit which is the
    foundation upon which the KDE is built. Qt is extremely easy to
    use and very powerful especially due to the Qt Designer and the
    amazing Qt documentation. PyQt is free if you want to create open
    source (GPL'ed) software and you need to buy it if you want to
    create proprietary closed source software. Starting with Qt 4.5
    you can use it to create non-GPL software as well. To get started,
    read about [PySide](http://qt-project.org/wiki/PySide).

wxPython

:   This is the Python bindings for the wxWidgets toolkit. wxPython
    has a learning curve associated with it. However, it is very
    portable and runs on Linux, Windows, Mac and even embedded
    platforms. There are many IDEs available for wxPython which
    include GUI designers as well such as
    [SPE (Stani's Python Editor)](http://spe.pycs.net/) and the
    [wxGlade](http://wxglade.sourceforge.net/) GUI builder. You can
    create free as well as proprietary software using wxPython. To get
    started, read the
    [wxPython tutorial](http://zetcode.com/wxpython/).

### Summary of GUI Tools ###

For more choices, see the
[GuiProgramming wiki page at the official python website](http://www.python.org/cgi-bin/moinmoin/GuiProgramming).

Unfortunately, there is no one standard GUI tool for Python. I suggest
that you choose one of the above tools depending on your
situation. The first factor is whether you are willing to pay to use
any of the GUI tools. The second factor is whether you want the
program to run only on Windows or on Mac and Linux or all of them. The
third factor, if Linux is a chosen platform, is whether you are a KDE
or GNOME user on Linux.

For a more detailed and comprehensive analysis, see Page 26 of the
[The Python Papers, Volume 3, Issue 1](http://archive.pythonpapers.org/ThePythonPapersVolume3Issue1.pdf).

## Various Implementations ##

There are usually two parts a programming language - the language and
the software. A language is *how* you write something. The software is
*what* actually runs our programs.

We have been using the *CPython* software to run our programs. It is
referred to as CPython because it is written in the C language and is
the *Classical Python interpreter*.

There are also other software that can run your Python programs:

[Jython](http://www.jython.org)

:   A Python implementation that runs on the Java platform. This means
    you can use Java libraries and classes from within Python language
    and vice-versa.

[IronPython](http://www.codeplex.com/Wiki/View.aspx?ProjectName=IronPython)

:   A Python implementation that runs on the .NET platform. This means
    you can use .NET libraries and classes from within Python language
    and vice-versa.

[PyPy](http://codespeak.net/pypy/dist/pypy/doc/home.html)

:   A Python implementation written in Python! This is a research
    project to make it fast and easy to improve the interpreter since
    the interpreter itself is written in a dynamic language (as
    opposed to static languages such as C, Java or C# in the above
    three implementations)

There are also others such as
[CLPython](http://common-lisp.net/project/clpython/) - a Python
implementation written in Common Lisp and
[IronMonkey](http://wiki.mozilla.org/Tamarin:IronMonkey) which is a
port of IronPython to work on top of a JavaScript interpreter which
could mean that you can use Python (instead of JavaScript) to write
your web-browser ("Ajax") programs.

Each of these implementations have their specialized areas where they
are useful.

## Functional Programming (for advanced readers) ##

When you start writing larger programs, you should definitely learn
more about a functional approach to programming as opposed to the
class-based approach to programming that we learned in the
[object-oriented programming chapter](#object-oriented-programming):

- [Functional Programming Howto by A.M. Kuchling](http://docs.python.org/3/howto/functional.html)
- [Functional programming chapter in 'Dive Into Python' book](http://www.diveintopython.net/functional_programming/index.html)
- [Functional Programming with Python presentation](http://ua.pycon.org/static/talks/kachayev/index.html)

## Summary ##

We have now come to the end of this book but, as they say, this is the
*the beginning of the end*!. You are now an avid Python user and you
are no doubt ready to solve many problems using Python. You can start
automating your computer to do all kinds of previously unimaginable
things or write your own games and much much more. So, get started!
