byte_of_python.asciidoc, before:

= A Byte of Python
:Author: Swaroop C H
:Email: swaroop@swaroopch.com
:Revision: 3.0
:doctype: book
:lang: en
:homepage: http://swaroopch.com/notes/python
:buy: http://swaroopch.com/buybook
:contact: http://swaroopch.com/contact
:toc:
:toclevels: 1
:sectlinks:
:experimental:
// http://asciidoctor.org/docs/asciidoc-syntax-quick-reference/#ui-macros

"A Byte of Python" is a free book on programming using the Python language. It serves as a tutorial
or guide to the Python language for a beginner audience. If all you know about computers is how to
save text files, then this is the book for you.

include::frontpage.asciidoc[]

include::dedication.asciidoc[]

include::preface.asciidoc[]

include::intro.asciidoc[]

include::installation.asciidoc[]

include::first_steps.asciidoc[]

include::basics.asciidoc[]

include::op_exp.asciidoc[]

include::control_flow.asciidoc[]

include::functions.asciidoc[]

include::modules.asciidoc[]

include::data_structures.asciidoc[]

include::problem_solving.asciidoc[]

include::oop.asciidoc[]

include::io.asciidoc[]

include::exceptions.asciidoc[]

include::stdlib.asciidoc[]

include::more.asciidoc[]

include::what_next.asciidoc[]

include::floss.asciidoc[]

include::about.asciidoc[]

include::revision_history.asciidoc[]

include::translations.asciidoc[]

include::translation_howto.asciidoc[]

Commit message:

Add last-updated-at timestamp

byte_of_python.asciidoc, after:

= A Byte of Python
:Author: Swaroop C H
:Email: swaroop@swaroopch.com
:Revision: 3.0
:doctype: book
:lang: en
:homepage: http://swaroopch.com/notes/python
:buy: http://swaroopch.com/buybook
:contact: http://swaroopch.com/contact
:toc:
:toclevels: 1
:sectlinks:
:experimental:
// http://asciidoctor.org/docs/asciidoc-syntax-quick-reference/#ui-macros

"A Byte of Python" is a free book on programming using the Python language. It serves as a tutorial
or guide to the Python language for a beginner audience. If all you know about computers is how to
save text files, then this is the book for you.

The book was last updated at {docdatetime} and generated using
http://www.asciidoctor.org[AsciiDoctor] {asciidoctor-version}.

include::frontpage.asciidoc[]

include::dedication.asciidoc[]

include::preface.asciidoc[]

include::intro.asciidoc[]

include::installation.asciidoc[]

include::first_steps.asciidoc[]

include::basics.asciidoc[]

include::op_exp.asciidoc[]

include::control_flow.asciidoc[]

include::functions.asciidoc[]

include::modules.asciidoc[]

include::data_structures.asciidoc[]

include::problem_solving.asciidoc[]

include::oop.asciidoc[]

include::io.asciidoc[]

include::exceptions.asciidoc[]

include::stdlib.asciidoc[]

include::more.asciidoc[]

include::what_next.asciidoc[]

include::floss.asciidoc[]

include::about.asciidoc[]

include::revision_history.asciidoc[]

include::translations.asciidoc[]

include::translation_howto.asciidoc[]
