io.md, before:

# Input and Output {#io}

There will be situations where your program has to interact with the user. For example, you would want to take input from the user and then print some results back. We can achieve this using the `input()` function and `print` function respectively.

For output, we can also use the various methods of the `str` (string) class. For example, you can use the `rjust` method to get a string which is right justified to a specified width. See `help(str)` for more details.

Another common type of input/output is dealing with files. The ability to create, read and write files is essential to many programs and we will explore this aspect in this chapter.

## Input from user

Save this program as `io_input.py`:

<pre><code class="lang-python">{% include "./programs/io_input.py" %}</code></pre>

Output:

<pre><code>{% include "./programs/io_input.txt" %}</code></pre>

**How It Works**

We use the slicing feature to reverse the text. We've already seen how we can make [slices from sequences](./data_structures.md#sequence) using the `seq[a:b]` code starting from position `a` to position `b`. We can also provide a third argument that determines the _step_ by which the slicing is done. The default step is `1` because of which it returns a continuous part of the text. Giving a negative step, i.e., `-1` will return the text in reverse.

The `input()` function takes a string as argument and displays it to the user. Then it waits for the user to type something and press the return key. Once the user has entered and pressed the return key, the `input()` function will then return that text the user has entered.

We take that text and reverse it. If the original text and reversed text are equal, then the text is a [palindrome](http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/palindrome).

### Homework exercise

Checking whether a text is a palindrome should also ignore punctuation, spaces and case. For example, "Rise to vote, sir." is also a palindrome but our current program doesn't say it is. Can you improve the above program to recognize this palindrome?

If you need a hint, the idea is that...[^1]

## Files

You can open and use files for reading or writing by creating an object of the `file` class and using its `read`, `readline` or `write` methods appropriately to read from or write to the file. The ability to read or write to the file depends on the mode you have specified for the file opening. Then finally, when you are finished with the file, you call the `close` method to tell Python that we are done using the file.

Example (save as `io_using_file.py`):

<pre><code class="lang-python">{% include "./programs/io_using_file.py" %}</code></pre>

Output:

<pre><code>{% include "./programs/io_using_file.txt" %}</code></pre>

**How It Works**

Note that we can create a new file object simply by using the `open` method.  We open (or create it if it doesn't already exist) this file by using the built-in `open` function and specifying the name of the file and the mode in which we want to open the file. The mode can be a read mode (`'r'`), write mode (`'w'`) or append mode (`'a'`). We can also specify whether we are reading, writing, or appending in text mode (`'t'`) or binary mode (`'b'`). There are actually many more modes available and `help(open)` will give you more details about them. By default, `open()` considers the file to be a 't'ext file and opens it in 'r'ead mode.

In our example, we first open/create the file in write text mode and use the `write` method of the file object to write  our string variable `poem` to the file and then we finally `close` the file.

Next, we open the same file again for reading. We don't need to specify a mode because 'read text file' is the default mode. We read in each line of the file using the `readline` method in a loop. This method returns a complete line including the newline character at the end of the line. When an _empty_ string is returned, it means that we have reached the end of the file and we 'break' out of the loop.

In the end, we finally `close` the file.

We can see from our `readline` output that this program has indeed written to and read from our new `poem.txt` file.

## Pickle

Python provides a standard module called `pickle` which you can use to store _any_ plain Python object in a file and then get it back later. This is called storing the object *persistently*.

Example (save as `io_pickle.py`):

<pre><code class="lang-python">{% include "./programs/io_pickle.py" %}</code></pre>

Output:

<pre><code>{% include "./programs/io_pickle.txt" %}</code></pre>

**How It Works**

To store an object in a file, we have to first `open` the file in __w__rite __b__inary mode and then call the `dump` function of the `pickle` module. This process is called _pickling_.

Next, we retrieve the object using the `load` function of the `pickle` module which returns the object. This process is called _unpickling_.

## Unicode

So far, when we have been writing and using strings, or reading and writing to a file, we have used simple English characters only.

> NOTE: If you are using Python 2, and we want to be able to read and write other non-English languages, we need to use the `unicode` type, and it all starts with the character `u`, e.g. `u"hello world"`

```python
>>> "hello world"
'hello world'
>>> type("hello world")
<class 'str'>
>>> u"hello world"
'hello world'
>>> type(u"hello world")
<class 'str'>
```

When we read or write to a file or when we talk to other computers on the Internet, we need to convert our unicode strings into a format that can be sent and received, and that format is called "UTF-8". We can read and write in that format, using a simple keyword argument to our standard `open` function:

<pre><code class="lang-python">{% include "./programs/io_unicode.py" %}</code></pre>

**How It Works**

You can ignore the `import` statement for now, we'll explore that in detail in the [modules chapter](./modules.md#modules).

Whenever we write a program that uses Unicode literals like we have used above, we have to make sure that Python itself is told that our program uses UTF-8, and we have to put `# encoding=utf-8` comment at the top of our program.

We use `io.open` and provide the "encoding" and "decoding" argument to tell Python that we are using unicode.

You should learn more about this topic by reading:

- ["The Absolute Minimum Every Software Developer Absolutely, Positively Must Know About Unicode and Character Sets"](http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/Unicode.html)
- [Python Unicode Howto](http://docs.python.org/3/howto/unicode.html)
- [Pragmatic Unicode talk by Nat Batchelder](http://nedbatchelder.com/text/unipain.html)

## Summary

We have discussed various types of input/output, about file handling, about the pickle module and about Unicode.

Next, we will explore the concept of exceptions.

---

[^1]: Use a tuple (you can find a list of _all_ [punctuation marks here](http://grammar.ccc.commnet.edu/grammar/marks/marks.htm)) to hold all the forbidden characters, then use the membership test to determine whether a character should be removed or not, i.e. forbidden = (`!`, `?`, `.`, ...).

Commit message:

IO - Unicode Revisions
***Note:  I don't know why we would use a unicode literal in this
example since my understanding is that Python 3 stores everything in
Unicode anyway, BUT I wanted to take a shot at revising this section to
make it easier to understand for newbies.  Please see what you think : )

io.md, after:

# Input and Output {#io}

There will be situations where your program has to interact with the user. For example, you would want to take input from the user and then print some results back. We can achieve this using the `input()` function and `print` function respectively.

For output, we can also use the various methods of the `str` (string) class. For example, you can use the `rjust` method to get a string which is right justified to a specified width. See `help(str)` for more details.

Another common type of input/output is dealing with files. The ability to create, read and write files is essential to many programs and we will explore this aspect in this chapter.

## Input from user

Save this program as `io_input.py`:

<pre><code class="lang-python">{% include "./programs/io_input.py" %}</code></pre>

Output:

<pre><code>{% include "./programs/io_input.txt" %}</code></pre>

**How It Works**

We use the slicing feature to reverse the text. We've already seen how we can make [slices from sequences](./data_structures.md#sequence) using the `seq[a:b]` code starting from position `a` to position `b`. We can also provide a third argument that determines the _step_ by which the slicing is done. The default step is `1` because of which it returns a continuous part of the text. Giving a negative step, i.e., `-1` will return the text in reverse.

The `input()` function takes a string as argument and displays it to the user. Then it waits for the user to type something and press the return key. Once the user has entered and pressed the return key, the `input()` function will then return that text the user has entered.

We take that text and reverse it. If the original text and reversed text are equal, then the text is a [palindrome](http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/palindrome).

### Homework exercise

Checking whether a text is a palindrome should also ignore punctuation, spaces and case. For example, "Rise to vote, sir." is also a palindrome but our current program doesn't say it is. Can you improve the above program to recognize this palindrome?

If you need a hint, the idea is that...[^1]

## Files

You can open and use files for reading or writing by creating an object of the `file` class and using its `read`, `readline` or `write` methods appropriately to read from or write to the file. The ability to read or write to the file depends on the mode you have specified for the file opening. Then finally, when you are finished with the file, you call the `close` method to tell Python that we are done using the file.

Example (save as `io_using_file.py`):

<pre><code class="lang-python">{% include "./programs/io_using_file.py" %}</code></pre>

Output:

<pre><code>{% include "./programs/io_using_file.txt" %}</code></pre>

**How It Works**

Note that we can create a new file object simply by using the `open` method.  We open (or create it if it doesn't already exist) this file by using the built-in `open` function and specifying the name of the file and the mode in which we want to open the file. The mode can be a read mode (`'r'`), write mode (`'w'`) or append mode (`'a'`). We can also specify whether we are reading, writing, or appending in text mode (`'t'`) or binary mode (`'b'`). There are actually many more modes available and `help(open)` will give you more details about them. By default, `open()` considers the file to be a 't'ext file and opens it in 'r'ead mode.

In our example, we first open/create the file in write text mode and use the `write` method of the file object to write  our string variable `poem` to the file and then we finally `close` the file.

Next, we open the same file again for reading. We don't need to specify a mode because 'read text file' is the default mode. We read in each line of the file using the `readline` method in a loop. This method returns a complete line including the newline character at the end of the line. When an _empty_ string is returned, it means that we have reached the end of the file and we 'break' out of the loop.

In the end, we finally `close` the file.

We can see from our `readline` output that this program has indeed written to and read from our new `poem.txt` file.

## Pickle

Python provides a standard module called `pickle` which you can use to store _any_ plain Python object in a file and then get it back later. This is called storing the object *persistently*.

Example (save as `io_pickle.py`):

<pre><code class="lang-python">{% include "./programs/io_pickle.py" %}</code></pre>

Output:

<pre><code>{% include "./programs/io_pickle.txt" %}</code></pre>

**How It Works**

To store an object in a file, we have to first `open` the file in __w__rite __b__inary mode and then call the `dump` function of the `pickle` module. This process is called _pickling_.

Next, we retrieve the object using the `load` function of the `pickle` module which returns the object. This process is called _unpickling_.

## Unicode


> NOTE: If you are using Python 2, and we want to be able to read and write other non-English languages, we need to use the `unicode` type, and it all starts with the character `u`, e.g. `u"hello world"`

```python
>>> "hello world"
'hello world'
>>> type("hello world")
<class 'str'>
>>> u"hello world"
'hello world'
>>> type(u"hello world")
<class 'str'>
```

The rules for translating Unicode into bytes (which is what computers use to process info) is called encoding.  Encoding is important when you want to send and receive info from other computers, and a popular encoding to use is UTF-8.  We can read and write in UTF-8 by using a simple keyword argument in our `open function`.

<pre><code class="lang-python">{% include "./programs/io_unicode.py" %}</code></pre>

**How It Works**


Whenever we write a program that uses Unicode literals like we have used above, we have to make sure that Python itself is told that our program uses UTF-8, and we have to put `# encoding=utf-8` comment at the top of our program.

We use `io.open` and provide the "encoding" and "decoding" argument to tell Python that we are using unicode.

You should learn more about this topic by reading:

- ["The Absolute Minimum Every Software Developer Absolutely, Positively Must Know About Unicode and Character Sets"](http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/Unicode.html)
- [Python Unicode Howto](http://docs.python.org/3/howto/unicode.html)
- [Pragmatic Unicode talk by Nat Batchelder](http://nedbatchelder.com/text/unipain.html)

## Summary

We have discussed various types of input/output, about file handling, about the pickle module and about Unicode.

Next, we will explore the concept of exceptions.

---

[^1]: Use a tuple (you can find a list of _all_ [punctuation marks here](http://grammar.ccc.commnet.edu/grammar/marks/marks.htm)) to hold all the forbidden characters, then use the membership test to determine whether a character should be removed or not, i.e. forbidden = (`!`, `?`, `.`, ...).
