translations.asciidoc, before:

[[translations]]
== Translations

There are many translations of the book available in different human languages, thanks to many
tireless volunteers!

If you want to help with these translations, please see the list of volunteers and languages below
and decide if you want to start a new translation or help in existing translation projects.

If you plan to start a new translation, please read the <<translation_howto,Translation Howto>>.

=== Arabic

Below is the link for the Arabic version. Thanks to Ashraf Ali Khalaf for translating the book, you
can read the whole book online at http://www.khaledhosny.org/byte-of-python/index.html or you can
download it from
http://downloads.sourceforge.net/omlx/byteofpython_arabic.pdf?use_mirror=osdn[sourceforge.net] for
more info see http://itwadi.com/byteofpython_arabi.

=== Brazilian Portuguese

There are two translations:

http://www.samueldiasneto.com/aprendendopython/index.html[Samuel Dias Neto]
(samuel.arataca@gmail.com) made the first Brazilian Portuguese translation of this book when Python
was in 2.3.5 version.

Samuel's translation is available at
http://www.samueldiasneto.com/aprendendopython/index.html[aprendendopython].

http://rodrigoamaral.net[Rodrigo Amaral] (rodrigoamaral@gmail.com) has volunteered to translate the
book to Brazilian Portuguese.

=== Catalan

Moises Gomez (moisesgomezgiron@gmail.com) has volunteered to translate the book to Catalan.  The
translation is in progress.

__________________________________________________
Moisès Gómez - I am a developer and also a teacher of programming (normally for people without any
previous experience).

Some time ago I needed to learn how to program in Python, and Swaroop's work was really
helpful. Clear, concise, and complete enough. Just what I needed.

After this experience, I thought some other people in my country could take benefit from
it too. But English language can be a barrier.

So, why not try to translate it? And I did for a previous version of BoP.

I my country there are two official languages. I selected the Catalan language assuming that others
will translate it to the more widespread Spanish.
__________________________________________________

=== Chinese

Translations are available at http://woodpecker.org.cn/abyteofpython_cn/chinese/ and
http://zhgdg.gitcafe.com/static/doc/byte_of_python.html.

Juan Shen (orion_val@163.com) has volunteered to translate the book to Chinese.

__________________________________________________
I am a postgraduate at Wireless Telecommunication Graduate School,
Beijing University of Technology, China PR. My current research
interest is on the synchronization, channel estimation and
multi-user detection of multicarrier CDMA system. Python is my major
programming language for daily simulation and research job, with the
help of Python Numeric, actually. I learned Python just half a year
before, but as you can see, it's really easy-understanding,
easy-to-use and productive. Just as what is ensured in Swaroop's
book, 'It's my favorite programming language now'.

'A Byte of Python' is my tutorial to learn Python. It's clear and
effective to lead you into a world of Python in the shortest time.
It's not too long, but efficiently covers almost all important
things in Python. I think 'A Byte of Python' should be strongly
recommendable for newbies as their first Python tutorial. Just
dedicate my translation to the potential millions of Python users in
China.
__________________________________________________

=== Chinese Traditional

Fred Lin (gasolin@gmail.com) has volunteered to translate the book to Chinese Traditional.

It is available at http://code.google.com/p/zhpy/wiki/ByteOfZhpy.

An exciting feature of this translation is that it also contains the _executable chinese python
sources_ side by side with the original python sources.

__________________________________________________
Fred Lin - I'm working as a network firmware engineer at Delta Network, and I'm also a contributor
of TurboGears web framework.

As a python evangelist (:-p), I need some material to promote python language. I found 'A Byte of
Python' hit the sweet point for both newbies and experienced programmers. 'A Byte of Python'
elaborates the python essentials with affordable size.

The translation are originally based on simplified chinese version, and soon a lot of rewrite were
made to fit the current wiki version and the quality of reading.

The recent chinese traditional version also featured with executable chinese python sources, which
are achieved by my new 'zhpy' (python in chinese) project (launch from Aug 07).

zhpy(pronounce (Z.H.?, or zippy) build a layer upon python to translate or interact with python in
chinese(Traditional or Simplified). This project is mainly aimed for education.
__________________________________________________

=== French

Gregory (coulix@ozforces.com.au) has volunteered to translate the book to French.

Gérard Labadie (gerard.labadie@gmail.com) has completed to translate the book to French.

=== German

Lutz Horn (lutz.horn@gmx.de), Bernd Hengelein (bernd.hengelein@gmail.com) and Christoph Zwerschke
(cito@online.de) have volunteered to translate the book to German.

Their translation is located at http://ftp.jaist.ac.jp/pub//sourceforge/a/ab/abop-german.berlios/

Lutz Horn says:

__________________________________________________
I'm 32 years old and have a degree of Mathematics from University of Heidelberg, Germany. Currently
I'm working as a software engineer on a publicly funded project to build a web portal for all
things related to computer science in Germany.The main language I use as a professional is Java,
but I try to do as much as possible with Python behind the scenes. Especially text analysis and
conversion is very easy with Python. I'm not very familiar with GUI toolkits, since most of my
programming is about web applications, where the user interface is build using Java frameworks like
Struts. Currently I try to make more use of the functional programming features of Python and of
generators.  After taking a short look into Ruby, I was very impressed with the use of blocks in
this language. Generally I like the dynamic nature of languages like Python and Ruby since it
allows me to do things not possible in more static languages like Java.I've searched for some kind
of introduction to programming, suitable to teach a complete non-programmer. I've found the book
'How to Think Like a Computer Scientist: Learning with Python', and 'Dive into Python'. The first
is good for beginners but to long to translate. The second is not suitable for beginners. I think
'A Byte of Python' falls nicely between these, since it is not too long, written to the point, and
at the same time verbose enough to teach a newbie. Besides this, I like the simple DocBook
structure, which makes translating the text a generation the output in various formats a charm.
__________________________________________________

Bernd Hengelein says:

__________________________________________________
Lutz and me are going to do the german translation together. We just started with the intro and
preface but we will keep you informed about the progress we make. Ok, now some personal things
about me. I am 34 years old and playing with computers since the 1980's, when the "Commodore C64"
ruled the nurseries. After studying computer science I started working as a software
engineer. Currently I am working in the field of medical imaging for a major german
company. Although C++ is the main language I (have to) use for my daily work, I am constantly
looking for new things to learn.Last year I fell in love with Python, which is a wonderful
language, both for its possibilities and its beauty. I read somewhere in the net about a guy who
said that he likes python, because the code looks so beautiful. In my opinion he's absolutly
right. At the time I decided to learn python, I noticed that there is very little good
documentation in german available. When I came across your book the spontaneous idea of a german
translation crossed my mind. Luckily, Lutz had the same idea and we can now divide the work.I am
looking forward to a good cooperation!
__________________________________________________

=== Greek

The Greek Ubuntu Community http://wiki.ubuntu-gr.org/byte-of-python-el[translated the book in
Greek], for use in our on-line asynchronous Python lessons that take place in our forums. Contact
https://twitter.com/savvasradevic[@savvasradevic] for more information.

=== Indonesian

Daniel (daniel.mirror@gmail.com) is translating the book to Indonesian at
http://python.or.id/moin.cgi/ByteofPython.

Wisnu Priyambodo (cibermen@gmail.com) also has volunteered to translate the book to Indonesian.

Also, Bagus Aji Santoso (baguzzzaji@gmail.com) has volunteered.

=== Italian

Enrico Morelli (mr.mlucci@gmail.com) and Massimo Lucci (morelli@cerm.unifi.it) have volunteered to
translate the book to Italian.

The Italian translation is present at http://www.gentoo.it/Programmazione/byteofpython.

__________________________________________________
_Massimo Lucci and Enrico Morelli_ - we are working at the University of Florence (Italy) -
Chemistry Department. I (Massimo) as service engineer and system administrator for Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance Spectrometers; Enrico as service engineer and system administrator for our CED and
parallel / clustered systems. We are programming on python since about seven years, we had
experience working with Linux platforms since ten years. In Italy we are responsible and
administrator for www.gentoo.it web site for Gentoo/Linux distrubution and www.nmr.it (now under
construction) for Nuclear Magnetic Resonance applications and Congress Organization and
Managements.That's all! We are impressed by the smart language used on your Book and we think this
is essential for approaching the Python to new users (we are thinking about hundred of students and
researcher working on our labs).
__________________________________________________

=== Japanese

Shunro Dozono (dozono@gmail.com) is translating the book to Japanese.

=== Mongolian

Ariunsanaa Tunjin (luftballons2010@gmail.com) has volunteered to translate the book to Mongolian.

_Update on Nov 22, 2009_ : Ariunsanaa is on the verge of completing the translation.

=== Norwegian (bokmål)

Eirik Vågeskar is a high school student at
http://no.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sandvika_videreg%C3%A5ende_skole[Sandvika videregående skole] in
Norway, a http://forbedre.blogspot.com/[blogger] and currently translating the book to Norwegian
(bokmål).

__________________________________________________
_Eirik Vågeskar_: I have always wanted to program, but because I speak a small language, the
learning process was much harder. Most tutorials and books are written in very technical English,
so most high school graduates will not even have the vocabulary to understand what the tutorial is
about. When I discovered this book, all my problems were solved. "A Byte of Python" used simple
non-technical language to explain a programming language that is just as simple, and these two
things make learning Python fun. After reading half of the book, I decided that the book was worth
translating. I hope the translation will help people who have found themself in the same situation
as me (especially young people), and maybe help spread interest for the language among people with
less technical knowledge.
__________________________________________________

=== Polish

Dominik Kozaczko (dominik@kozaczko.info) has volunteered to translate the book to
Polish. Translation is in progress and it's main page is available here:
http://python.edu.pl/byteofpython/[Ukąś Pythona].

_Update_ : The translation is complete and ready as of Oct 2, 2009. Thanks to Dominik, his two
 students and their friend for their time and effort!

__________________________________________________
_Dominik Kozaczko_ - I'm a Computer Science and Information Technology teacher.
__________________________________________________

=== Portuguese

Fidel Viegas (fidel.viegas@gmail.com) has volunteered to translate the book to Portuguese.

=== Romanian

Paul-Sebastian Manole (brokenthorn@gmail.com) has volunteered to translate this book to Romanian.

__________________________________________________
_Paul-Sebastian Manole_ - I'm a second year Computer Science student at Spiru Haret University,
here in Romania. I'm more of a self-taught programmer and decided to learn a new language,
Python. The web told me there was no better way to do so but read ''A Byte of Python''. That's how
popular this book is (congratulations to the author for writing such an easy to read book). I
started liking Python so I decided to help translate the latest version of Swaroop's book in
Romanian. Although I could be the one with the first initiative, I'm just one volunteer so if you
can help, please join me.
__________________________________________________

=== Russian

Vladimir Smolyar (v_2e@ukr.net) has completed a Russian translation at
http://wombat.org.ua/AByteOfPython/.

=== Ukranian

Averkiev Andrey (averkiyev@ukr.net) has volunteered to translate the book to Russian, and perhaps
Ukranian (time permitting).

=== Serbian

"BugSpice" (amortizerka@gmail.com) has completed a Serbian translation:

__________________________________________________
You can download it from http://www.sendspace.com/filegroup/DlNY1mF7DFqNt4e61LvVug (Latin and
Cyrillic serbian (and similar languages) version.
__________________________________________________

More details at http://forum.ubuntu-rs.org/Thread-zagrljaj-pitona.

=== Slovak

Albertio Ward (albertioward@gmail.com) has translated the book to Slovak at
http://www.fatcow.com/edu/python-swaroopch-sl/ :

__________________________________________________
We are a non-profit organization called "Translation for education". We represent a group of
people, mainly students and professors, of the Slavonic University. Here are students from
different departments: linguistics, chemistry, biology, etc. We try to find interesting
publications on the Internet that can be relevant for us and our university colleagues. Sometimes
we find articles by ourselves; other times our professors help us choose the material for
translation. After obtaining permission from authors we translate articles and post them in our
blog which is available and accessible to our colleagues and friends. These translated publications
often help students in their daily study routine.
__________________________________________________

=== Spanish

Alfonso de la Guarda Reyes (alfonsodg@ictechperu.net), Gustavo Echeverria
(gustavo.echeverria@gmail.com), David Crespo Arroyo (davidcrespoarroyo@hotmail.com) and Cristian
Bermudez Serna (crisbermud@hotmail.com) have volunteered to translate the book to Spanish.

Gustavo Echeverria says:

__________________________________________________
I work as a software engineer in Argentina. I use mostly C# and .Net technologies at work but
strictly Python or Ruby in my personal projects. I knew Python many years ago and I got stuck
inmediately. Not so long after knowing Python I discovered this book and it helped me to learn the
language. Then I volunteered to translate the book to Spanish. Now, after receiving some requests,
I've begun to translate "A Byte of Python" with the help of Maximiliano Soler.
__________________________________________________

Cristian Bermudez Serna says:

__________________________________________________
I am student of Telecommunications engineering at the University of Antioquia (Colombia). Months
ago, i started to learn Python and found this wonderful book, so i volunteered to get the Spanish
translation.
__________________________________________________

=== Swedish

Mikael Jacobsson (leochingkwake@gmail.com) has volunteered to translate the book to Swedish.

=== Turkish

Türker SEZER (tsezer@btturk.net) and Bugra Cakir (bugracakir@gmail.com) have volunteered to
translate the book to Turkish. "Where is Turkish version? Bitse de okusak."

Commit message:

Adding Korean translation
Thanks Jeongbin Park!

translations.asciidoc, after:

[[translations]]
== Translations

There are many translations of the book available in different human languages, thanks to many
tireless volunteers!

If you want to help with these translations, please see the list of volunteers and languages below
and decide if you want to start a new translation or help in existing translation projects.

If you plan to start a new translation, please read the <<translation_howto,Translation Howto>>.

=== Arabic

Below is the link for the Arabic version. Thanks to Ashraf Ali Khalaf for translating the book, you
can read the whole book online at http://www.khaledhosny.org/byte-of-python/index.html or you can
download it from
http://downloads.sourceforge.net/omlx/byteofpython_arabic.pdf?use_mirror=osdn[sourceforge.net] for
more info see http://itwadi.com/byteofpython_arabi.

=== Brazilian Portuguese

There are two translations:

http://www.samueldiasneto.com/aprendendopython/index.html[Samuel Dias Neto]
(samuel.arataca@gmail.com) made the first Brazilian Portuguese translation of this book when Python
was in 2.3.5 version.

Samuel's translation is available at
http://www.samueldiasneto.com/aprendendopython/index.html[aprendendopython].

http://rodrigoamaral.net[Rodrigo Amaral] (rodrigoamaral@gmail.com) has volunteered to translate the
book to Brazilian Portuguese.

=== Catalan

Moises Gomez (moisesgomezgiron@gmail.com) has volunteered to translate the book to Catalan.  The
translation is in progress.

__________________________________________________
Moisès Gómez - I am a developer and also a teacher of programming (normally for people without any
previous experience).

Some time ago I needed to learn how to program in Python, and Swaroop's work was really
helpful. Clear, concise, and complete enough. Just what I needed.

After this experience, I thought some other people in my country could take benefit from
it too. But English language can be a barrier.

So, why not try to translate it? And I did for a previous version of BoP.

I my country there are two official languages. I selected the Catalan language assuming that others
will translate it to the more widespread Spanish.
__________________________________________________

=== Chinese

Translations are available at http://woodpecker.org.cn/abyteofpython_cn/chinese/ and
http://zhgdg.gitcafe.com/static/doc/byte_of_python.html.

Juan Shen (orion_val@163.com) has volunteered to translate the book to Chinese.

__________________________________________________
I am a postgraduate at Wireless Telecommunication Graduate School,
Beijing University of Technology, China PR. My current research
interest is on the synchronization, channel estimation and
multi-user detection of multicarrier CDMA system. Python is my major
programming language for daily simulation and research job, with the
help of Python Numeric, actually. I learned Python just half a year
before, but as you can see, it's really easy-understanding,
easy-to-use and productive. Just as what is ensured in Swaroop's
book, 'It's my favorite programming language now'.

'A Byte of Python' is my tutorial to learn Python. It's clear and
effective to lead you into a world of Python in the shortest time.
It's not too long, but efficiently covers almost all important
things in Python. I think 'A Byte of Python' should be strongly
recommendable for newbies as their first Python tutorial. Just
dedicate my translation to the potential millions of Python users in
China.
__________________________________________________

=== Chinese Traditional

Fred Lin (gasolin@gmail.com) has volunteered to translate the book to Chinese Traditional.

It is available at http://code.google.com/p/zhpy/wiki/ByteOfZhpy.

An exciting feature of this translation is that it also contains the _executable chinese python
sources_ side by side with the original python sources.

__________________________________________________
Fred Lin - I'm working as a network firmware engineer at Delta Network, and I'm also a contributor
of TurboGears web framework.

As a python evangelist (:-p), I need some material to promote python language. I found 'A Byte of
Python' hit the sweet point for both newbies and experienced programmers. 'A Byte of Python'
elaborates the python essentials with affordable size.

The translation are originally based on simplified chinese version, and soon a lot of rewrite were
made to fit the current wiki version and the quality of reading.

The recent chinese traditional version also featured with executable chinese python sources, which
are achieved by my new 'zhpy' (python in chinese) project (launch from Aug 07).

zhpy(pronounce (Z.H.?, or zippy) build a layer upon python to translate or interact with python in
chinese(Traditional or Simplified). This project is mainly aimed for education.
__________________________________________________

=== French

Gregory (coulix@ozforces.com.au) has volunteered to translate the book to French.

Gérard Labadie (gerard.labadie@gmail.com) has completed to translate the book to French.

=== German

Lutz Horn (lutz.horn@gmx.de), Bernd Hengelein (bernd.hengelein@gmail.com) and Christoph Zwerschke
(cito@online.de) have volunteered to translate the book to German.

Their translation is located at http://ftp.jaist.ac.jp/pub//sourceforge/a/ab/abop-german.berlios/

Lutz Horn says:

__________________________________________________
I'm 32 years old and have a degree of Mathematics from University of Heidelberg, Germany. Currently
I'm working as a software engineer on a publicly funded project to build a web portal for all
things related to computer science in Germany.The main language I use as a professional is Java,
but I try to do as much as possible with Python behind the scenes. Especially text analysis and
conversion is very easy with Python. I'm not very familiar with GUI toolkits, since most of my
programming is about web applications, where the user interface is build using Java frameworks like
Struts. Currently I try to make more use of the functional programming features of Python and of
generators.  After taking a short look into Ruby, I was very impressed with the use of blocks in
this language. Generally I like the dynamic nature of languages like Python and Ruby since it
allows me to do things not possible in more static languages like Java.I've searched for some kind
of introduction to programming, suitable to teach a complete non-programmer. I've found the book
'How to Think Like a Computer Scientist: Learning with Python', and 'Dive into Python'. The first
is good for beginners but to long to translate. The second is not suitable for beginners. I think
'A Byte of Python' falls nicely between these, since it is not too long, written to the point, and
at the same time verbose enough to teach a newbie. Besides this, I like the simple DocBook
structure, which makes translating the text a generation the output in various formats a charm.
__________________________________________________

Bernd Hengelein says:

__________________________________________________
Lutz and me are going to do the german translation together. We just started with the intro and
preface but we will keep you informed about the progress we make. Ok, now some personal things
about me. I am 34 years old and playing with computers since the 1980's, when the "Commodore C64"
ruled the nurseries. After studying computer science I started working as a software
engineer. Currently I am working in the field of medical imaging for a major german
company. Although C++ is the main language I (have to) use for my daily work, I am constantly
looking for new things to learn.Last year I fell in love with Python, which is a wonderful
language, both for its possibilities and its beauty. I read somewhere in the net about a guy who
said that he likes python, because the code looks so beautiful. In my opinion he's absolutly
right. At the time I decided to learn python, I noticed that there is very little good
documentation in german available. When I came across your book the spontaneous idea of a german
translation crossed my mind. Luckily, Lutz had the same idea and we can now divide the work.I am
looking forward to a good cooperation!
__________________________________________________

=== Greek

The Greek Ubuntu Community http://wiki.ubuntu-gr.org/byte-of-python-el[translated the book in
Greek], for use in our on-line asynchronous Python lessons that take place in our forums. Contact
https://twitter.com/savvasradevic[@savvasradevic] for more information.

=== Indonesian

Daniel (daniel.mirror@gmail.com) is translating the book to Indonesian at
http://python.or.id/moin.cgi/ByteofPython.

Wisnu Priyambodo (cibermen@gmail.com) also has volunteered to translate the book to Indonesian.

Also, Bagus Aji Santoso (baguzzzaji@gmail.com) has volunteered.

=== Italian

Enrico Morelli (mr.mlucci@gmail.com) and Massimo Lucci (morelli@cerm.unifi.it) have volunteered to
translate the book to Italian.

The Italian translation is present at http://www.gentoo.it/Programmazione/byteofpython.

__________________________________________________
_Massimo Lucci and Enrico Morelli_ - we are working at the University of Florence (Italy) -
Chemistry Department. I (Massimo) as service engineer and system administrator for Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance Spectrometers; Enrico as service engineer and system administrator for our CED and
parallel / clustered systems. We are programming on python since about seven years, we had
experience working with Linux platforms since ten years. In Italy we are responsible and
administrator for www.gentoo.it web site for Gentoo/Linux distrubution and www.nmr.it (now under
construction) for Nuclear Magnetic Resonance applications and Congress Organization and
Managements.That's all! We are impressed by the smart language used on your Book and we think this
is essential for approaching the Python to new users (we are thinking about hundred of students and
researcher working on our labs).
__________________________________________________

=== Japanese

Shunro Dozono (dozono@gmail.com) is translating the book to Japanese.

=== Korean

Jeongbin Park (pjb7687@gmail.com) has translated the book to Korean -
https://github.com/pjb7687/byte_of_python

__________________________________________________
I am Jeongbin Park, currently working as a Biophysics & Bioinformatics researcher in Korea.

A year ago, I was looking for a good tutorial/guide for Python to introduce it to my colleagues,
because using Python in such research fields is becoming inevitable due to the user base is growing
more and more.

But at that time only few Python books are available in Korean, so I decided to translate your
ebook because it looks like one of the best guides that I have ever read!

Currently, the book is almost completely translated in Korean, except some of the text in
introduction chapter and the appendixes.

Thank you again for writing such a good guide!
__________________________________________________

=== Mongolian

Ariunsanaa Tunjin (luftballons2010@gmail.com) has volunteered to translate the book to Mongolian.

_Update on Nov 22, 2009_ : Ariunsanaa is on the verge of completing the translation.

=== Norwegian (bokmål)

Eirik Vågeskar is a high school student at
http://no.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sandvika_videreg%C3%A5ende_skole[Sandvika videregående skole] in
Norway, a http://forbedre.blogspot.com/[blogger] and currently translating the book to Norwegian
(bokmål).

__________________________________________________
_Eirik Vågeskar_: I have always wanted to program, but because I speak a small language, the
learning process was much harder. Most tutorials and books are written in very technical English,
so most high school graduates will not even have the vocabulary to understand what the tutorial is
about. When I discovered this book, all my problems were solved. "A Byte of Python" used simple
non-technical language to explain a programming language that is just as simple, and these two
things make learning Python fun. After reading half of the book, I decided that the book was worth
translating. I hope the translation will help people who have found themself in the same situation
as me (especially young people), and maybe help spread interest for the language among people with
less technical knowledge.
__________________________________________________

=== Polish

Dominik Kozaczko (dominik@kozaczko.info) has volunteered to translate the book to
Polish. Translation is in progress and it's main page is available here:
http://python.edu.pl/byteofpython/[Ukąś Pythona].

_Update_ : The translation is complete and ready as of Oct 2, 2009. Thanks to Dominik, his two
 students and their friend for their time and effort!

__________________________________________________
_Dominik Kozaczko_ - I'm a Computer Science and Information Technology teacher.
__________________________________________________

=== Portuguese

Fidel Viegas (fidel.viegas@gmail.com) has volunteered to translate the book to Portuguese.

=== Romanian

Paul-Sebastian Manole (brokenthorn@gmail.com) has volunteered to translate this book to Romanian.

__________________________________________________
_Paul-Sebastian Manole_ - I'm a second year Computer Science student at Spiru Haret University,
here in Romania. I'm more of a self-taught programmer and decided to learn a new language,
Python. The web told me there was no better way to do so but read ''A Byte of Python''. That's how
popular this book is (congratulations to the author for writing such an easy to read book). I
started liking Python so I decided to help translate the latest version of Swaroop's book in
Romanian. Although I could be the one with the first initiative, I'm just one volunteer so if you
can help, please join me.
__________________________________________________

=== Russian

Vladimir Smolyar (v_2e@ukr.net) has completed a Russian translation at
http://wombat.org.ua/AByteOfPython/.

=== Ukranian

Averkiev Andrey (averkiyev@ukr.net) has volunteered to translate the book to Russian, and perhaps
Ukranian (time permitting).

=== Serbian

"BugSpice" (amortizerka@gmail.com) has completed a Serbian translation:

__________________________________________________
You can download it from http://www.sendspace.com/filegroup/DlNY1mF7DFqNt4e61LvVug (Latin and
Cyrillic serbian (and similar languages) version.
__________________________________________________

More details at http://forum.ubuntu-rs.org/Thread-zagrljaj-pitona.

=== Slovak

Albertio Ward (albertioward@gmail.com) has translated the book to Slovak at
http://www.fatcow.com/edu/python-swaroopch-sl/ :

__________________________________________________
We are a non-profit organization called "Translation for education". We represent a group of
people, mainly students and professors, of the Slavonic University. Here are students from
different departments: linguistics, chemistry, biology, etc. We try to find interesting
publications on the Internet that can be relevant for us and our university colleagues. Sometimes
we find articles by ourselves; other times our professors help us choose the material for
translation. After obtaining permission from authors we translate articles and post them in our
blog which is available and accessible to our colleagues and friends. These translated publications
often help students in their daily study routine.
__________________________________________________

=== Spanish

Alfonso de la Guarda Reyes (alfonsodg@ictechperu.net), Gustavo Echeverria
(gustavo.echeverria@gmail.com), David Crespo Arroyo (davidcrespoarroyo@hotmail.com) and Cristian
Bermudez Serna (crisbermud@hotmail.com) have volunteered to translate the book to Spanish.

Gustavo Echeverria says:

__________________________________________________
I work as a software engineer in Argentina. I use mostly C# and .Net technologies at work but
strictly Python or Ruby in my personal projects. I knew Python many years ago and I got stuck
inmediately. Not so long after knowing Python I discovered this book and it helped me to learn the
language. Then I volunteered to translate the book to Spanish. Now, after receiving some requests,
I've begun to translate "A Byte of Python" with the help of Maximiliano Soler.
__________________________________________________

Cristian Bermudez Serna says:

__________________________________________________
I am student of Telecommunications engineering at the University of Antioquia (Colombia). Months
ago, i started to learn Python and found this wonderful book, so i volunteered to get the Spanish
translation.
__________________________________________________

=== Swedish

Mikael Jacobsson (leochingkwake@gmail.com) has volunteered to translate the book to Swedish.

=== Turkish

Türker SEZER (tsezer@btturk.net) and Bugra Cakir (bugracakir@gmail.com) have volunteered to
translate the book to Turkish. "Where is Turkish version? Bitse de okusak."
